_This document was generated from '[src/documentation/wiki-faq.ts](https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/tree/main//src/documentation/wiki-faq.ts)' on 2026-07-17, 08:21:17 UTC presenting an overview of flowR's frequently asked questions (v2.12.3, using R v4.6.1). Please do not edit this file/wiki page directly._
- [💮 *flowR* FAQ](#____flowR__FAQ)
  - [🧑‍💻 <i>flowR</i> Development](#_______i_flowR_/i__Development)  
    
  - [✨ Using <i>flowR</i>](#__Using__i_flowR_/i_)  
    
- [🇷 R FAQ](#___R_FAQ)
  - [📦 R Packages](#___R_Packages)  
    
- [💻 Editor FAQ](#___Editor_FAQ)
  - [⚙️ Recommended Editor Configs](#___Recommended_Editor_Configs)  
    


<h2 id="____i_flowR_/i__FAQ">💮 <i>flowR</i> FAQ</h2>

<h3 id="_______i_flowR_/i__Development">🧑‍💻 <i>flowR</i> Development</h3>


<details><summary>How do I run <b>all checks</b> before pushing?</summary>

Run `npm run checkup`: it runs the linter, the functionality and system tests, the wiki generation, and the docker image build + smoke test concurrently, then prints one pass/fail summary.
Run a subset with the job ids (e.g. `npm run checkup -- lint tests`) or skip the container build with `npm run checkup -- --no-docker`.

</details>


<details><summary>How to add a <b>linting rule</b>?</summary>

To add a new linting rule, see [Create Linting Rules](https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/wiki/create-linting-rules).

</details>


<details><summary>How to create <b>new wiki</b> pages?</summary>

To create an automatically generated wiki page, you can follow these steps:
- Create a new file in `src/documentation` with a name like `wiki-thename.ts`.
- Register your new wiki page in the `src/cli/wiki.ts` file to have it executed by the wiki generation tool.

You can test your page by piping the wiki generation script to a file. For example, you can run the following command:

```shell
npm run wiki
```

Alternatively use the following to generate a specific wiki page:

```shell
npm run wiki -- --filter=Dataflow
```

Or, activate the watch mode to automatically regenerate the wiki on changes:

```shell
npm run wiki:watch
```

</details>


<details><summary>How to do <b>logging</b> in flowR?</summary>

Check out the [Logging Section in the Linting and Testing wiki page](https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/wiki/linting-and-testing#logging) for more information on how to do logging in *flowR*.

</details>


<details><summary>How to generate <b>mermaid diagrams</b>?</summary>

There are several ways to generate mermaid diagrams based on the input data that you want to use.
- From the AST (abstract syntax tree): [`./src/util/mermaid/ast.ts`](https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/tree/main/./src/util/mermaid/ast.ts)
- From the CFG (control flow graph): [`./src/util/mermaid/cfg.ts`](https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/tree/main/./src/util/mermaid/cfg.ts)
- From the DFG (dataflow graph): [`./src/util/mermaid/dfg.ts`](https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/tree/main/./src/util/mermaid/dfg.ts)

</details>


<details><summary>How to get a REPL with debug-info/<b>hot-reload</b>?</summary>

To enter the development repl, execute `npm run main-dev` in contrast to `npm run flowr`
	this will use an unminified build (keeping debug info) and also watches the source files for changes.
	In case of a change, this mode automatically recompiles.
	Please note, that this may have negative performance implications (so do not use this for e.g., benchmarking).

</details>


<details><summary>How to run <b>tests</b> with <b>verbose</b> logging?</summary>

Use the dedicated npm script to run all tests with trace-level log output:

```shell
npm run test:verbose
```

Alternatively, set the `FLOWR_VERBOSE` environment variable directly:

```shell
FLOWR_VERBOSE=true npm run test
```

Both forms accept the usual vitest filters (e.g. `npm run test:verbose -- cli/server`).

</details>


<details><summary>What are <b>test labels</b>?</summary>

Tests are labeled based on the *flowR* capabilities that they test for.
The list of supported capabilities can be found on the [Capabilities](https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/wiki/capabilities) wiki page.
For more extensive information on test labels, see the [test labels wiki section](https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/wiki/linting-and-testing#test-labels).

</details>


<details><summary>Why can't I pass <b>arguments</b> when running flowR <b>with npm</b>?</summary>

With `npm` you have to pass arguments in a specific way. The `--` operator is used to separate the `npm` arguments from the script arguments. For example, if you want to run `flowR` with the `--help` argument, you can use the following command:

```shell
npm run flowR -- --help
```

</details>

<h3 id="__Using__i_flowR_/i_">✨ Using <i>flowR</i></h3>


<details><summary>How to <b>query</b> an R project?</summary>

For this you can use flowR's [Query API](https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/wiki/query-api).
If you want to create your own project using flowR as a library, check out the
[flowr-analysis/sample-analyzer-project-query](https://github.com/flowr-analysis/sample-analyzer-project-query) repository for an example project setup.

</details>


<details><summary>How to <b>watch</b> a file for changes in the REPL?</summary>

Replace the `file://` prefix with `watch://` when passing a path to any REPL command.
flowR will run the command immediately and then re-run it every time the file (or any file inside the specified folder) changes.
Press Ctrl+C or enter any other command to leave watch mode.

```shell
:df watch://path/to/analysis.R
```

For a folder, flowR uses the same project discovery as with `file://`:

```shell
:query @linter watch://path/to/project
```

</details>


<details><summary>How to configure flowR <b>per kind of project</b>?</summary>

Use <a href="https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/wiki/Interface#configuring-flowr" title="Configuration Option (object): Overwrite (parts of) the configuration depending on the project kind flowR detects, e.g. to give a shiny app its implicit sources.">specializeConfig</a>: it overwrites (parts of) the configuration depending on the kind of project flowR detects (e.g. `shiny-app`).
This is how a shiny app gets its <a href="https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/wiki/Interface#configuring-flowr" title="Configuration Option (array): Files a framework loads on its own, without any source() call (e.g. global.R in a shiny app), in the order they are loaded; flowR orders the matching project files accordingly and analyzes them as one program. Entries are case-insensitive globs matched against the file path, a plain name matches any file with that name, and entries matching no project file are warned about. Usually set per project kind via specializeConfig.">project.implicitSources</a> out of the box, as shiny loads these files without any `source()` call:

```json
{
  "specializeConfig": {
    "shiny-app": {
      "project": {
        "implicitSources": [
          "global.R",
          "ui.R",
          "server.R",
          "app.R"
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Anything you configure directly wins over the value the project kind defaults to, so setting `project.implicitSources` yourself overrides the list above.

</details>



<h2 id="___R_FAQ">🇷 R FAQ</h2>

<h3 id="___R_Packages">📦 R Packages</h3>


<details><summary>How does flowR know a <b>package's exports</b>?</summary>

See the [Signature Database](https://github.com/flowr-analysis/flowr/wiki/signature-database) wiki page.

</details>


<details><summary>How to get <b>documentation</b> for a function or package?</summary>

There are a couple of ways to get documentation for a function or package.

🖥️ Firstly, if you have already installed the package the function originated from you can simply run `?<package name>::<function name>` in an R session to print the
relevant documentation. If you don't know the origin of the package, you can use
`??<function name>` in an R shell to fuzzy find all documentations containing
`<function name>` or something similar.

🌐 Secondly, if you don't have or don't want to install the package you can simply google the fully qualified name of the function. Good sources include [rdrr.io](https://rdrr.io/)
or [rdocumentation.org](https://rdocumentation.org/). Additionally, the package documentation PDF can also
be downloaded directly from [cran](https://cran.r-project.org/).

</details>


<details><summary>What is the R <b>prelude</b> and R <b>base</b> package?</summary>

The base package contains lots of base functions like `source` for example.
The R prelude includes the base package along with several other packages.
Packages that were loaded by the prelude can be called without prefixing the
function call with the package name and the `::` operator.

The packages loaded by the R prelude can be seen in the `attached base packages`
sections in the output of `sessionInfo()`.

</details>



<h2 id="___Editor_FAQ">💻 Editor FAQ</h2>

<h3 id="___Recommended_Editor_Configs">⚙️ Recommended Editor Configs</h3>


<details><summary>How can I launch the flowr repl form vs code?</summary>

You can use the following launch task (`.vscode/launch.json`):
			
```json
{
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "configurations": [
    {
      "type": "node",
      "request": "launch",
      "name": "Launch Program",
      "skipFiles": [
        "node_modules/**"
      ],
      "program": "${workspaceFolder}/src/cli/flowr.ts",
      "preLaunchTask": "npm: build-dev",
      "console": "integratedTerminal"
    },
    {
      "type": "node",
      "request": "attach",
      "name": "Attach to Process",
      "port": 9229
    }
  ]
}
```

</details>


<details><summary>How can I make eslint and ZED work together?</summary>

Use this project config (`.zed/settings.json`) to disable all formatters except eslint:
			
```json
{
  "languages": {
    "TypeScript": {
      "formatter": [],
      "prettier": {
        "allowed": false
      },
      "code_actions_on_format": {
        "source.fixAll.eslint": true
      }
    }
  },
  "hard_tabs": true
}
```

</details>